### Deliver successful projects
How do projects get started? When someone has a problem to solve or an opportunity to pursue. We all want our projects to be successful. Organizations want to enjoy the benefits that those projects produce, and as project managers we look forward to our next project with opportunities to learn about new industries or manage projects around the world. Your job as project manager is an ongoing **balancing act between project scope and the time, resources, and budget you've been given**. In this LinkedIn Learning course, we'll use a case study to explore how to manage projects successfully. We'll look at how to start a project the right way and then put together a comprehensive plan for running it. I'll guide you through keeping your project on track from start to finish. You'll get a chance to practice what you learned with the exercises at the end of almost every movie and with end of chapter challenges. I'm Bonnie Biafore. I'm a project manager, consultant, and trainer, and I've been helping people manage projects for years. If you're ready to find out how satisfying it is to deliver projects successfully, join me in my Project Management Foundations course at LinkedIn Learning. 

###  What you should know
You don't need to know anything about project management before you start this course. It works either as an introduction to project management for beginners, or a refresher if you've been managing projects for a while. This course is only an introduction to project management. We'll go through the basics, so you'll get to know what's involved in managing a project. Here's what to expect as you work through the course. We start at the very beginning, what is the project? What is project management? We'll look at two examples of methodologies, **Waterfall** and **Agile**. When you're ready to learn more you can explore the rest of the project management courses in the LinkedIn learning library. Second, we jump into how to get a Waterfall project started. Basically, what you do to get the project approved to proceed. The next two chapters are about building a project plan and schedule with the Waterfall approach. Then we take a short detour to look at how to manage Agile projects. After that, we'll look at what happens while a Waterfall project is running, including communication, running meetings, and working with Teams. Next, we examine how to keep an eye on project performance in a Waterfall project and what to do to keep a project on plan or get it back on track. The chapter on closing talks about what you do to close out a Waterfall project. The last chapter is devoted to a brief description of the changes you'll find in the 7th Edition of PMI's Project Management Body of Knowledge. In this course, we're going to follow a project through the project management life cycle. So for the next few hours, you're going to be a project manager for the Breslin Regional Hospital. The hospital is adding a new cancer wing and improving its facilities, thanks to government grants and generous donations from several donors. You'll be managing a project to replace the system and processes for scheduling patients into rooms throughout the hospital. The goal is to improve the hospital's scheduling capability and maximize the use of facilities. A more complete description of the case study is available in the exercise files. 